**iot preping **
smart devices are devices that have the ability to connect to collect data, process it and connect to the internet without the need of a human interception. 
the protocols that are used by the iot devices for communication are categorised into two ie the protocols used in data link communication (networking) and the protocol used for application or management and are as below .  (data platforms are the platforms that are used for collecting and storing data )
- for the point of data link communication, iot devices use technologies like Bluetooth for very short range often used for wearable eg smart watches, health diagnosing tools, headsets etc, wifi for medium range and large data sharing, real time monitoring used in camera monitoring, radars, voip etc. we have zigbee this one is also meant for low data, low range and low energy consumption and is a bit out dated and was replaced by ble. we have LoRaWAN. this one is made for low energy, small data sharing but to cover the longest range measured in miles or kilometres. we as well have the cellular networks as well which can also be used in the deployment of iot devices in ike smart city implementations 
- the other protocols deal in application and user management. and include the following. MQTT (message queuing telemetry transport ) this is a protocol that is made for constrained devices and low resourced networks. this protocol uses the pub/sub model where the subscriber sends the data to the central broker which is called the topic in this case. the subscriber will subscribe to the topic and will always be updated about the data that will be sent to the topic (central server). this model is more scalabel since the devices do not need to know each other (loose  coupling) it as well only sends data when there is need be thus saving bandwidth. these advantages also reflect to the MQTT as well. this mode is as well perfect for large IOT networks since it is both battery and bandwidth efficient. MQTT is message oriented. the other protocol is CoAP (constrained application protocol ) as the name says, this protocol is specifically made for the constrained devices and networks with low resources. this protocol is udp based thus does not show reliability if the message has reached to the destination. it uses restful APIs thus enabling it to be easily integrated with available web applications. coap is lightweight since it is made to support low resourced devices.  this one uses the request/ response model. at its core, CoAP is a lightweight restful protocol that acts like http but with UDP for lightweight. the request/response model is when the client sends the server a request and the server gives it the response. however, CoAP can as well be used as the pub sub with the central server and subscriber and works just like the pub server model operates. some of its advantages include less complexity since it uses the request server, it uses udp which will help keep things lightweight, it is lightweight for constrained devices, it uses restful APIs thus can be easily integrated with available web applications. and some of it cons include the following. it causes message overhead since every device will have to end its own message to each other in a big iot network. tight coupling since the devices have to first know each other in order to communicate effectively with each other. when the server fails, the whole connecting is dead, high latency since clients initiate every exchange thus  high delay for some tasks. we have the http protocal which is the common protocol used for transfering web content using tcp. this protocol is not made for iot but can still be used by iot. the client initiates the communication with a tcp syn message and the server replies with an ack message. the client then sends a request and the server processes the data... this is a reliable one a bit secure and stronger if using https which is protected by the ssl tls encryption.  we then have the AMQP (advanced message queuing protocol). this is a more advanced protocol that is feature rich and operating   tcp and supporting the pub/sub model. it is designed for reliable communication in enterprises. it supports message queuing and message routing and it is reliable and safer compare to its counter part MQTT. we the have the DDS (distributed data service). this one is a middle ware protocol that is designed for real-time systems. it supports TCP mode of communication, high performance, scalabel and real time data distribution. 

just like any other thing, smart devices do have characteristics that define them and these include the following;
- processing power: smart devices have tiny chips that will work as processors for the data that is being collected 
- network: smart devices are connected to a network for smooth communication eg a smart bulb is connected to network so it can communicate with the phone. 
- sensors: they have the ability to sense the change in the environment so that they can execute the programmed command 
- security and privacy features: they require authentication in order to operate with a given user
- automation: they run different tasks automatically without the need for human invasion. eg a photocell will automatically switch on the bulb at dawn 
an actuator can be a device that will turn a signal into an action.... this can be a change in the power as the signal and turns it into motion, switching off or on, changing the colour respectively etc. 
the process of data collection and sharing involves the following steps
- data sensors: the iot devices have sensors that will record data from the environment. the data can be sound, temperature, location, weight, motion etc
- actuators. the data is then sent to the actuators... these are devices that turn signals into actions for example when the sensor of a thermostat senses increased temperature, it will have to record the temperature that is rising.. so its the actuator that will turn the temperature rise into a command to be executed. 
- data transmission: the data that was collected is the transmitted to the central services using either MQTT, CoAP, AMQP, DDS etc for processing.
- data processing... data is then sent to the processor to  be processed thought processed from the end points if the devices use edge computing. 
- data sharing. the data is then sent to the central servers for more usage.. this can be analysis, future decision making and other uses. 
the iot as well has 5 components thus devices, platform, connectivity, network and applications
